---
weight: 6
title: 01 - 04 Combination
authors: Lenny Lin
categories: Interview 
tags: []
description: 
draft: false
date: "2022-09-13"
lastmod: "2022-09-13"
series: null
toc: true
---



<!--more-->

---

EC1. Managing people. Promotes team communication, builds team effectiveness and sets an example for others by reacting positively to challenges

EC1.3 Discuss a time that an employee became more successful as a result of your management. What actions did you take to help them achieve this improvement? Why did you choose these actions? [10 marks] 

---
&emsp;My definition of employee's success is they enjoy what they are doing, and they see the value in what they are doing.  The way I did to make them success is recognition, and recognition comes in different forms.  I would like to share two situations.

&emsp;The first situation happened at Testmark where I was the lab manager.  It was the business transition period, the team was reorganized.  I redeployed one technician from the position in the lab to the customer service rep because she had experience in testings, and her ability to make people connect.  There was potential in her.  It turned that she thrived at the new position, today she is the customer service manager managing customer service reps at 5 facilities across Ontario.

&emsp;The second situation happened at AECL where I was the Chemist. The story started with solving a conflict with the employee.  I took a proactive approach seeking his feedback on how I could do differently down the road.  Luckly enough, he began with providing feedback, then telling his struggling in his life.  We came closer in relationship.  Later on, I looked into performance of each individual technologist.  I collected data.  I realized he was the top performer all the time.  During a performance appraisal in one year, the section head quit the job, he was afraid that the branch manager knew nothing about his performance.  I sent an email to the branch manager providing data to support that this employee exceeded expectation.  My voice was heard, and his performance was valued.  As a result, he changed his behaviours in many ways, such as violation of coffee time policy.  Afterwards, he showed his support to me while I dealt with the most difficult employee situation.  When the section was laid-off, he asked me to become his reference while he was looking for job.  In this situation, I turned a work conflict to winning a person.

&emsp;These two situations proved the quote "build up people, and the score will take care of itself." 

---

EC1. Managing people. Promotes team communication, builds team effectiveness and sets an example for others by reacting positively to challenges.  

EC1.4 Describe a personnel management mistake that you made in the past. Looking back, what would you do differently? [10 marks]

---

I used to believe in the management mindset of the previous CEO Jack Welch, "leaders should fire the bottom 10% of their workforce each year, as part of an orderly continuous improvement process." I practiced that when I was managing the lab at Testmark.  A technician did not show up to do testing on a weekend that was scheduled.  I fired him.  I had every reason to do so, because he had performance issues due to drinking issue, Accuracy took actions of discipline, sent out letters of disciplines, but there were no changes in his behavior.

My mindset has changed since I joined in at AECL.  I adopted the philosophy of "build up people, the score will take care of itself."  I think it works in Canadian culture.  That does not mean being nice always, it means be fair with employee. There are unlimited means to provide constructive feedback if the leader cares about people as long as the employee makes a choice to have a good life and improve their performance.  I believe people come to work together for reasons.  It is not coincident. 

I found that the struggling in life could affect the work performance.  Looking back, I did not know much about his past. I would give myself a chance to know him, walk through with him just I did for the employee at AECL.

---

EC2. Commitment to quality. Sets the tone for excellence and uses process improvement methods to manage work and streamline processes.  

EC2.2 What is some of the most useful criticism you’ve ever received? Why? What did you do in response to the criticism? [10 marks]

---

Many years ago when I sat down with an internal client during a coffee time at AECL.  He told me that they sent samples to a contract lab because they knew we can't provide good turn-around-time service.  There was no overnight solution to this problem.  I began with conducting business analysis.  I broke down the operational concerns into two areas for improvement that we can do. 1) The first area was everyone's accountability.  I set clear expectations in the performance appraisal that the team can commit to.  I also set a goal they strive to achieve. I held them accountable by monitoring the progress. It was a good start.  2) The second area was to save us from tedious and repetitive data analysis.  I developed several data processing programs using VBA.  a) One program helped the team to work around the problem with LIMS and generate batch list. b) one program helped a technologist to report VOC results. c) One program helped the QA officer generate QC reports. d) One program helped me review data.  The benefit was obvious.  a) The data quality on report was improved, no typo, no calculation errors.  b) Time was saved, for example, the VOC reporting from scratch to the end was saved from four days to a couple of hours. c) I was not panicking in dealing with multitasks.

Why it was the most useful criticism? 1) It opened my eyes to see where we were for a team, and set the goal we would reach; 2) It became a catalyst to make positive change to the group.

---

EC3. Planning, organizing, and coordinating. Plans and organizes group activities and/or major projects; complements established routines and systems with own processes.  

EC3.2 What were your team’s goals last year? What was your role in setting these goals? How did you decide to select these as goals? To what extent did you meet them? How did you measure whether or not you met them? [10 marks]

---

Our section was suffered from productivity at AECL for a couple of years. I tracked the analysis flow for a couple of years. In the first year when I was delegated to oversee the lab operation, I approved technologist's timesheets, so I had statistics on time they spent to different aspects.  I consolidated data for each technologist performance.  I had a clue on where we were at now, and what aim we could reach at.  Therefore, when I was asked to set the performance objectives, I knew what I should put on.  I also understood I should not expect too much. I came up with the team's goals and individual goals on top of objectives at the branch level.  I had meeting with each one going over the list, and had mutual agreement.  The goals were measurable, so the performance could be measured.